---
layout: post
title: >-
  Intersections of Race and Queer Theory and Disability Studies: Is There a
  Proper Definition of Disability?
published: true
---

<span class="versal t9">T</span>hroughout history, multiple cultures
classified disabled bodies and homosexuality under the same category of
pathological conditions that deviate from the norm, and that they have
emerged as the result of sexual aberration, and unnatural and perverse
actions. But how and why have these societies come to classify disabilty
and homosexuality as such? Even though in certain countries disabled
people and homosexuals have been assigned the rights every human being
should enjoy, we are still witnesses to numerous instances of disability
and gay rights activists rightfully demanding that “their legitimacy or
‘naturality’ be acknowledged” (Foucault, *History of Sexuality*). In his
book *Crip Theory: Cultural Signs of Queerness and Disability*, Robert
McRuer tries to analyze and explain how the changing economic,
political, and cultural systems create abled and disabled conditions.
However, McRuer does not present us with a typical study on disability
and queer studies where the main focus would be placed on disability and
homosexuality, but he takes a somewhat different, perhaps an even more
complex approach. In the opening chapter of the book, “Compulsory
Able-Bodiedness and Queer/Disabled Existence”, McRuer remarks that his
focus is on the construction of able bodies, or “the system of
compulsory able-bodiedness” (McRuer 2) and compulsory heteronormativity.
In addition, the article tackles how human societies came to regard
heterosexuality and able bodies as invisible, but homosexuality and
disabled bodies as something starkly visible, something that will always
stand out in the crowd. One thing that stands out in this article is
McRuer’s reference to the definition of *heterosexuality* as provided in
the 1971 issue of the *Oxford English Dictionary*. As McRuer notes, a
heterosexual person/heterosexuality was defined as “pertaining to or
characterized by the normal relations of the sexes; opp. to
*homosexual*.” This definition is very problematic, because it
marginalizes non-heterosexual people as abnormal or disabled bodies. I
cannot stop but wonder what this concept of “normal relations of the
sexes” is supposed to convey to the audience. First of all, how many
sexes are there—is the number of sexes limited only to two, just because
that is what we have been taught in schools? Secondly, what do normal
relations stand for? Does the concept of “normal relations of the sexes” include anyone
taking part in an orgy, since the definition obviously excludes one
group of people only, “opp. to homosexuals (OED).” Definitions of this
kind have turned *homosexuality* into a marginalized concept,
transforming members of different sexual identities into undesirable and
disabled bodies.

While disabled bodies and homosexuality have become more visible to the
eyes of able bodies and heterosexuals, they have been invisible within
their minds, because societies and cultures have taught the people to
suppress that which is not to be *named or talked of, or that which is
unheard of*. By not being mentioned or talked of, homosexuality became
subservient to the dictates of heteronormativity: anyone deviating from
sexual identities in which societies had instructed them has to hide or
suppress their sexual desires and conform to the practices of the
majority! If a parent gives a child a carrot and tries to feed it to
him/her, and the child refuses the carrot because s/he does not like it,
the parents will most likely stop with the same practice, but if someday that same child
wishes to share their life with a person of the same sex, in most cases
the parent will insist that their child supresses his/her feelings.
It is interesting how we have been taught that refusing the food that
may benefit your body is not a big problem, but being with a person who
may nourish your body, soul and mind is a completely different thing.
When you think about it, our whole existence comes down to the concept
of a norm, which, as noted by Lennard J. Davis, “implies that the
majority of the population must or should somehow be part of the norm”
(Davis, *Enforcing Normalcy*, p. 29). McRuer’s stance on compulsory
able-bodiedness perfectly ties in with Davis’ concept of deviations or
extremes. One of humanity’s greatest fears is losing a *sane* mind, or
losing a *normal* body, and it is due to this that humans, in their
aspirations to reach the ideal, succumb to embracing what they were told
about able-bodiedness. If we fail to embrace the compulsory
able-bodiedness or to follow in the footsteps of heteronormativity, does
that mean that our bodies transgress the boundaries of normalcy and
ordinary bodies? This makes me think of an Oscar winning movie based on
a true story, *Boys Don’t Cry*, starring Hillary Swank, in which she
plays a teenage girl wanting to be a boy. Mistreated and rejected by her
own family, Brandon Teena (the name of the girl) runs away from home in
search of a better life, falls in love with a girl, and dreams of saving
enough money to undergo a sex reassignment surgery. The movie ends
brutally: Brandon Teena gets raped by two boys from the town and
murdered, simply because her body and identity were different. The
community in which she lived could not accept her extraordinary,
transgender body, because it did not fit within their norm of
able-bodiedness and compulsory heteronormativity.

Reflecting on Rosemarie Garland-Thomson’s analysis of the four modes of
visual rhetoric applied to the representations of disability in
photography, in his article “Crip Eye for the Normate Guy”, Robert
McRuer tests our understanding of the exotic or transgressive mode of
representation. McRuer takes a different approach from Garland-Thomson
by expanding his analysis on the famous self-proclaimed “supermasochist”
Bob Flanagan. As suggested by Garland-Thomson, photographs characterized
by the mode of the exotic create a certain distance between the viewer
and the viewed, since the viewers perceive the exposed body as alien,
unknown, mysterious, or terrifying. Bob Flanagan’s shows and photographs
depicting him and his masochistic desires stand out as examples of the
visual mode of the exotic, nonetheless, his viewers came to identify
with that *exoticism*, because Flanagan represented the desires they
were taught to alter and suppress. Considering the fact that Flanagan
was born with cystic fibrosis, I cannot stop but wonder if he was trying
to overcome his disability through “supermasochism”, or simply to escape
it? McRuer proposes a fifth mode of visual representation, that of the
hegemonic, which in the era of freak shows would symbolize “a
combination of the exotic and wondrous” (McRuer 192), of something that
satiates the humans’ need for “extravagant and indisputable otherness of
the freak” (Garland-Thomson 65).

In her article “Critical Race Theory, Feminism and Disability:
Reflections on Social Justice and Personal Identity”, Adrienne Asch
mentions “the universializing of disability” (Asch 3). As Asch
contends, disabled people should not be aligned with the minority group
model, rather, the laws should be adapted to everyone’s impairment, for
even similar impairments do not affect every disabled person in the same
way. Why can’t people without impairments adapt to those with
impairments; why can’t disabled people be given the same privileges, the
same jobs, or be paid the same amount that the average worker gets?
Without a job or a decent income from their states, many disabled people
are not able to afford their extremely expensive medications or any
means of sustenance. On top of all, many societies have prevented their
disabled people from educating themselves in regular schools and
achieving any success in life. “Perhaps the world really just does not
want people with disabilities to be around after all. Until it is
legitimate, respectable, and acceptable to be a person with a disability
in the world, until the nondisabled majority recognizes how ubiquitous
impairment is and how likely it is that everyone will experience it
themselves or in someone they love, and until the nondisabled majority
perceives that the millions of people with impairments are fully human
and can contribute in meaningful ways to the economy and the family,
that world will fight against every legal or moral claim made upon it to
change institutions, cultural practices, and institutional and physical
structures to become readily inclusive” (Asch 4). That everyone will
experience an impairment at some point in life is true: at least, we are
all aware that we will grow old, and then our motor and cognitive skills
will wane. If we are aware of this notion, then why are we afraid to
accept differences when sooner or later we all will become a part of
those differences? Like many other theorists, Arsch claims that
disability is a social construct, but it is a construct that is
affecting our everyday lives, because it strips non-disabled people of
the skills and knowledge that disabled people have. For example, if sign
language were a compulsory subject in elementary and secondary schools,
we all would have a broader knowledge. How come that non-disabled people
who do not know sign language are not classified as disabled? Are we
ever going to witness the era when TV shows, news and music videos will
become adapted to hearing impaired people? Why can’t all the big
publishing houses also adapt their books to vision impaired people?
Considering the fact that “characteristics like ethnicity, race, sex,
and disability are all interwoven” (Arsch 11) in one’s experience, an
important question comes to the fore, the question of authenticity. If a
person does not come from the Native American community, do they have
the right to write about the history and tradition of Native American
people? Likewise, if a person is not disabled but they write about
disability, does that mean that their analyses and representations of
disability are less authentic than the accounts written by people with
disabilities? The answer is it really does not matter, because
marginalized members must become integrated within their respective
societies; they should not be succumbed to exploitation, degradation,
violence, ridicule, lack of any power, and to everything that “cultural
imperialism” (Iris Young) has brought upon them.

In light of Arsch’s essay, I am posting a link to the official music
video for the song of the Serbian singer Željko Joksimović, “Nije ljubav
stvar” (Love is Not a Material Object). The video proves that people
with disabilities, in this case hearing impaired people, can and have
the right to experience audio-visual mediums. Along with the singer, we
have a hearing impaired boy in the video who translates the song into
sign language, and breaks the cultural-accessibility boundaries by
conveying the song to disabled and marginalized members of societies.
Perhaps this is the future of music industry, and I truly hope it is,
because music—not only narratives or photographs—should serve as a
medium for the display of self and identity, both for disabled and
non-disabled people. The song ends with the following message:
“Languages may differ, but the message remains the same”, and that
message is that disabled people are no different than non-disabled
people. Disabled people also possess emotional abilities; they cry and
suffer when hurt; they laugh when happy; they fall in love just like any
ordinary human being; in sum, they share the universal human
experience—love and grief.

In “Who is Disabled? Defining Disability”, Susan Wendell analyzes the
criteria for defining and classifying certain disabilities. As Wendell
argues, the classification of disabilities differs between countries,
depending on the society’s perception of what constitutes a disability,
as well as on the incidence of certain disabilities. What Wendell tries
to achieve is the recognition of illnesses into the category of
disabilities, because for some strange reasons AIDS and chronic
illnesses are not recognized as disabilities according to the American
Disability Act. Is disability an illness, and is illness a disability?
The fact is that illnesses such as Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, heart
and respiratory problems are “major causes of disability in Canada, the
United States, and Great Britain, and many people with disabilities in
these countries are also ill and/or old” (Wendell 13). Even when we
catch a slight cold, we all become disabled. Our mind and our motor
skills do not function at its best, but the greatest illness of the
modern man is laziness/sloth. Even when we have the capacity to walk, we
prefer to lie in our comfortable, warm sofa, watch TV and eat. If we
also consider the fact that today we have more cars than humans, and
that every fourth human being on this planet drives a car, then the
majority of us is already disabled. In what way do cars and wheelchairs
differ from each other? Isn’t a car just another type of a crutch?
Wendell also points to how different societies look at similar
disabilities. She mentions the examples of the North American continent
and Africa, stating that in the U.S. or Canada walking less than
500-1000 meters a day might be considered a disability, whereas in some
parts of Africa where people walk miles and miles for a drinking water,
walking only 1 kilometer, even 3 kilometers a day would be considered a
disability. While this whole stigma of disability mainly affects people
whose bodies and identities are seen as deviant or undesirable, Wendell
points to the fact that sooner or later, we will all grow old and be
affected by some of the disabilities we perceive in the *Other*. There
is a saying in Bosnia-Herzegovina that human beings are always disabled:
first we walk on four legs (as babies), then we walk on two legs, and
finally, when the old age comes, we walk on three legs since the third
leg would be some kind of support—a cane, for example.
